Hello teacher, hello
everyone. My name is Nguyen and I'm from
Hanoi. I just heard you share
some things, and I want to ask
you a question on behalf of my friend regarding
her family issues. She said that during high school, she was
so focused on her studies that she
didn't pay much attention to her family.
Around the end of her first year, she
discovered that her parents were having
problems and her mother was having an affair.
Then, at the beginning of her second year,
her father started working in the South,
and she wasn't home much anymore. She
noticed that her mother's relationship with the
other man was progressing quite a bit.
Gradually, it reached a certain point, and she wondered if
she should talk to her mother frankly
and tell
her father. She told me that she
blames her mother, of course,
but she also has a reality she's been experiencing for a long time.
At home, it's mostly the mother who
takes care of the family, even taking
care of the father. She's in charge of the
finances and manages everything
in the house. The father has
hardly helped at all, even during
a period when he went away for two years to study. The
mother stayed home, taking care of the baby, who had just been
born, and doing a lot of housework.
As a result, when the father returned to work, he did
n't pay much attention to her. He drank heavily,
causing the mother a lot of suffering. The mother
said she witnessed
her mother's suffering until about two years ago, when she finally saw her mother happy. She
feels she doesn't want to break up their
current happiness. Although it's a
flawed kind of happiness, she said she'd
watched some videos where the woman said that
if you
see your parents having
moral issues and you remain silent,
you're creating bad karma for
yourself and committing a
sin against both parents. Recently, she also
realized...  It's possible that her parents already
know about it, but they do
n't even care and just let it go.
She's gradually feeling like
her family isn't really a family anymore.
Her parents are each preoccupied with their
own things, and she doesn't know how
to handle it. She doesn't know
what to do and has
n't received any specific advice. So, on
her behalf, I'd like to ask for your
advice.
I'll answer your question. Nguyen, I'm
asking on behalf of my friend. Honestly,
when a child goes out into the world and then
returns home, they
think of it as the
safest place, but it has become
an unsafe place. I
really appreciate her feelings. Many
people, when their family isn't safe, become
depressed and engage in bad behavior
because their hearts are so sad. They
might drink alcohol, play video games, and
make
bad friends there, right? And then they
lose a life.  Regarding a person's life, I'd like to
send my encouragement to
Nguyen. I want to encourage you, my friend, to
recognize that you must be the pillar
of the family because you still have your younger sibling.
Just a slight misstep, a
small loss, and your life will take a completely
different turn. If you don't
cherish your mother, don't cherish your father,
don't understand him, and harbor
resentment, your family will completely fall
apart, everyone going their separate ways. And
when your parents get old and unfortunately fall
ill, you'll feel
conflicted, thinking, "I deserve it, I can't not take care of them." This will cause you
remorse and
make it very difficult to
handle. Because you also have your
own family, many things will be
problematic, and you'll feel overwhelmed.
And your future daughter-in-law
won't understand
your family situation, and you'll face difficulties in your
own life. So today, I'm
guiding you from resolving
your family issues to guiding you in finding a
partner and setting your sights on a future.  What kind of person should I choose to marry?
I'll
answer everything from beginning to
end. Because girls
often have many more insecurities about their families than boys. Also,
in your current situation,
you need to talk to your mother, you
really need to talk to her so she doesn't have to suppress her feelings
anymore.
That means you shouldn't continue creating bad karma, you
shouldn't lie to her, understand?
You should share with your mother that
you've seen these things and that
your feelings are like this, and you honestly don't know how to
resolve it. Just be direct,
that's the
solution, but tell your mother that you don't
know how to resolve it. Because it's true, you
don't know how to resolve it because your
parents are getting old. And when they're old, they'll
get sick and have illnesses.
Will your mother's boyfriend leave his family
to be with your mother and take care of her in her
old age?
If that person's
family knows about it and they don't have
much morality... then...  Like that uncle over there, if he's sick and in
pain, will his child be happy to take care of him?
If you continue like
this, when I get married, will my
husband respect you? If he doesn't respect
you, will he respect me?
You should consider this. If you and your husband
can't live together, you should
separate, and you can marry someone
else. Then everything will be
legitimate, and you'll find it easier to handle
your old age. It will also be easier for me to be
filial and take care of you because I won't be under
pressure from my husband, right? I won't be under
pressure, so I can take care
of you more easily. As for my father, I've determined that he's not a good person, but you have to consider the cause. There must be a reason, not no reason at all. You work to earn money, but do you look down on my father in that? So
don't judge him based on
how he treats you, because
the important thing is to know so
you can turn yourself around. You have to know.  It's
my fault, and I shouldn't blame
others anymore, right? If I don't blame anyone, then
my mother has already accumulated merit and blessings. Is it because my
father treated my mother that way for
no reason? Or is it because my father doesn't earn enough money that my
mother has certain attitudes towards him? Because of
those attitudes, my father can't resolve them, so
he uses alcohol to drown his sorrows. My mother needs to consider the root cause
before blaming my
father. That means you have to analyze the situation deeply for both of them.
If my mother were treated the
same way, what would she do? If my father doesn't
care about my mother, she'll find someone else,
but if she's also disrespected, would
she find someone else? If my father doesn't find someone
else, then he'll have to resort to alcohol. That's
natural. So in this matter, my father is
n't necessarily the one to blame; all the
blame lies with my mother. When I point
out all of my mother's mistakes, then
she will turn her heart away from
blaming others, understand my father, and be
more likely to abandon her bad behavior.
That's a thoughtful way to resolve things,
and my mother will realize that in
this life, I will be the one to share with her, and
she won't need to...  Go find someone
else. That's the first step:
showing Mom your mistakes, and the second step:
starting to support
her. I understand all of
this, so I'll be empathetic
towards Dad and Mom. I'll share everything with
Mom. Before, Mom only had one
person to share with, so all her joys and
sorrows were poured into that person.
Now, there's a division, meaning I'm there to
divide things up, so Mom will care less
about the other person. And whenever
that person talks to Mom, from
her heart, Mom will analyze what's right and
wrong, and she won't be
completely happy listening to them anymore.
That's how you distance people,
making them
stop their negativity. A filial child must have
intelligence to be truly filial.
Then, on the other hand, you can
confide in Dad, and Dad can say something different:
Mom works so hard, but sometimes
Dad doesn't earn enough money and feels inferior. Because
Dad has never asked Mom, "Why don't you
earn money?"  "If he has feelings for
you, how do you feel about it? Has Dad ever asked you that?
Or is he just being insecure? When
Mom makes money and Dad doesn't,
has Dad ever said that to Mom? So, if
Dad doesn't talk to Mom, Mom does
n't know who to share with either. The shortcoming
is that Dad doesn't share with Mom, and Mom doesn't share
with Dad. Now, maybe Dad is getting older, so maybe he can listen to what I have to share. So you have to build a bridge, share and talk with your dad every day, through messages or phone calls.
That means talking and sharing daily. You
have to support Dad until he feels comfortable, and then you start talking about things to help him understand
Mom and forgive her. At that point, you can talk about
Mom's regrets and remorse, meaning you'll
build a bridge to bring them closer
together if possible. If not,
you can help them
separate so they can have a
better old age and help her when
she finds a partner."  As for the guy, he doesn't have that
bad reputation. Usually, when
people get married, they're very
understanding of each other at first, but then
something happens and they start cursing the whole family.
So now, when it's her turn to
find a boyfriend, and she
shows interest, she should tell him everything about her
family problems and express her feelings.
If
he
accepts her and they develop a loving relationship,
she should make a promise: "I will never
bring up my parents' faults when we're arguing.
I won't accept it. If you do that,
I'll take responsibility for my actions. It has
nothing to do with my parents."
So, if we make mistakes, we should be
honest with each other and not bring up
our parents. That's a promise you must make and practice. I have experience with parents who aren't good people. I
have a father and two mothers,
but they weren't
unfaithful; they were married according to
traditional beliefs.  She gave permission,
but she was also always cautious. When she was
in love, she told her husband, "If there's any
problem between us, we'll resolve it between
ourselves. I will never involve your family
because I'm in control of
all my actions. What I do
is based on my own thoughts. So if I'm
wrong, you can tell me, and if you're wrong, I can tell you. I
won't involve
your family, and you won't involve
mine. If we have disagreements
and we involve each other's families, we'll
separate immediately. Don't let it drag
on." That's what she shared from
her experience. In her life, she respected
her husband's family and never interfered when he was at fault, and he
absolutely did the same.
If he tried to interfere, she would block him immediately. If he
interfered with her family, there would be no
further conversation. That means
we have to be firm from the beginning so that things will
be better and our filial piety will
be more complete. So you need
to cultivate filial piety completely; that
's the solution for you right now.
Currently and after you have a boyfriend/girlfriend, you
must handle things the same way. Then things
will turn out well. But I believe that with a
filial heart, you will have the perseverance to
resolve everything, and with a
compassionate heart, things will get
better. It's really a matter of cause and effect. If you
resolve your
parents' issues, your own karma
will change because you
empathize with others, you help
others understand each other better, and your karma
will change. Truly, a person who
has a happy family
must have good fortune. That's the point; it's
not about going outside and loving someone else to find
happiness, because your heart will never
be at peace. Here, I'm just giving an
example: going to your girlfriend's place and saying a few nice things to her might bring
joy, but in that joy, you'll just be
responding. Consider how you treat her at home,
so the joy is never complete.
But if a husband and wife
know how to share, then their joy
is complete. Perhaps the two of you
and your child go out together, and that's a complete joy.
Giving the child everything means that the other person
gets everything completely, they taste the
flavor of happiness. But the other person
never tastes happiness. For
example, when they're with their mistress, they're always
weighing the pros and cons between their mistress and their wife. When they're with their
wife, they're always wondering who's happier, their
wife or their mistress. This person is never at peace. They're never at
peace, not even with their own child, not
even with their mistress's child. So, those who
have affairs never
experience the happiness of the world.
Worldly happiness is the warmth of a
family; they don't have that when they have
happiness with their spouse, caring for their
child together. Those people have a very
good happiness because they eat together, go on
vacations together, go out together,
share things together, talk together—is that
better than not? They're not
distracted. So when you're not distracted,
you can enjoy happiness
more. I'm just giving an example: a
delicious meal is served, but
one person says, "Eat up, you're not eating."  "
You're going to die with me? Eat it right now, do you find it delicious?" That means your
mind is constantly preoccupied with
the food, then with that other person standing there
asking, "Do you find it delicious?" You ca
n't truly appreciate the
taste anymore because your mind is distracted.
But if it's your wife, your
husband, or your child, you ask, "Son,
eat, is it delicious?" The husband's
mind is focused solely on his child and
family. "It's delicious, is
n't it, son?" That means both of you are sharing the joy of talking to your child. That's the joy because your mind is
n't distracted. So don't
think that because someone is having an affair, they're a
womanizer or a good person. Or that
seeing others having
affairs makes you feel inferior because you don't. That's
not the case; that man having an affair
is actually being consumed by fire.
So you'll change your perspective. If you think that someone who
loves two or three women at once won't
find happiness, that they'll never have
peace in this world, that they won't know how to give their love
completely, and that you won't feel
the fullness of it.  Where are the feelings? She just gave an
example: when someone loves one
person, they feel the longing and
anticipation for their loved one,
and they experience happiness when their
loved one comes into their life. But what about a guy who loves
four women? What about
that feeling? He
just talks nonsense, eats,
breaks up, and then goes
to another place. He's no different from a
robot, no different from a lump of flesh, right?
What feelings are there? If
a person has no feelings, then they're just a
lump of flesh, not a human being. Without
feelings, they
become just an inanimate object. They're just a
machine that eats and a machine that talks, speaking without
knowing what they're saying, without feeling the meaning of their words,
without
happiness in their words, and without
feeling happiness when
others speak to them. For example, if
you love only one person, you can feel the
small act of care and attention from that person,
and that
feeling of happiness arises.  Friends,
the feeling of happiness arises when
you have someone who cares about you. But if
four women are all interested in the same man, and
then that man also shows interest and
says one woman isn't as good as the other, at
that point, the thinking is gone, and there's no longer any
feeling of happiness. I'm saying this so you can
discover the element of
your own consciousness. So, is it happier loving one person
or loving four people? Is it
happier loving one person?
We will feel happiness from the
heartfelt anticipation,
from the care and love,
from the anger and resentment,
and from helping
others not be angry with us anymore, right? That's what
people call "Holding Hands," isn't it? But if it's like, "
If you're kind to me, I'll
stay with you; if you're not kind, I'll go to the
other woman," then you'll always receive
pretense from others, not
genuine affection, because if they don't dare to be
angry with you, what can you do? There are
moments of comforting others, comforting
others also brings happiness, and that's what
I'm saying.  This is a message conveyed
to the Buddhist Love, Marriage, and
Family Club, so please
practice it. If you're in many relationships, you
should let go and choose only one person to love.
If you're in many relationships, choose one
person to love and experience
true happiness. Youth passes by, and there's
no more chance to experience
that happiness.
[Applause]
[Music]